The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this program is Robert Heinlein.
Robert Heinlein to many readers is science fiction. His first story, Lifeline, was published in
1939 by John W. Campbell. He was followed by several short stories, many reflecting Heinlein's
themes of longevity, revolution, and mysticism. In 1947 he started a series of juvenile novels
which have greatly shaped the way people perceive science fiction today. The turning point for
Heinlein's work was the publication of Starship Troopers in 1959. This was followed by possibly
the first science fiction bestseller, Stranger in a Strange Land. Heinlein's work became
increasingly mystical and dominated by his own moral and ethical views.
His early work, I think, is probably what most people today remember him for. As you said, his
first story was published in 1939. And that story and the ones that followed it were really based
on the old pulp formulas in a lot of ways. They were gimmick stories, some of them. They were
adventure stories, exploration stories. They were all fast-moving, they were entertaining,
they were clever. Lifeline, for instance, has as its gimmick a machine that predicts,
not predicts, I'm sorry, it actually states the moment of a person's death. And a certain Dr.
Panero demonstrates the validity or the efficacy of this machine and predicts people's death.
Of course, the insurance companies don't like this too well, so they initiate certain plots to get
rid of him. And near the end of the story, he's assassinated. In addition to being a gimmick
story, it's also got a clever ending. Panero, it seems, had scanned his own lifeline with this
machine and had foreseen his own death by the insurance company plot, but of course,
wasn't able to do anything about it because the machine always told the truth.
In the story, Rhodes must roll, Heinlein extrapolated a future transport system that was rather unique.
It was a series of conveyor belts, if you will, that were placed side by side, each one being a
faster speed than the next one. A person could step onto a very slow-moving five mile an hour belt
and progress his way inward until he was traveling at quite a high speed. These things were huge.
They stretched all over the country, and I suppose the world with people building buildings,
businesses on the inner strips that would just move all the time.
Rhodes must roll was written in 1940, and Heinlein was inaccurate in predicting that private cars
would go out of use in the highways. But he was rather accurate in predicting that transportation
would be fairly well watched over by large and powerful monopolies, which they are now.
The crux of the book or the story is that it's a conflict between the union or the workers and
management and what types of services the roads will have and inadequacies and pay and other
things along that same line. Another one of his early stories and considered a classic
for its theme is by his bootstraps, published in 1941. And this is a time travel story. Heinlein
covered time travel at various times in his career. This, I believe, was his first, and some
people consider a classic of the form. But it's a brain-twisting story. Of course, when you talk
about time travel, you're dealing with all sorts of paradoxes. And what Heinlein does in this story
is to construct a plot whereby the main character plays all the roles. He's a young man. He goes
back in time. He meets himself as an old man. He's obviously gone back in time before.
And everybody he meets in the past is one aspect of himself when he had been in the past at previous
times. It's very hard to follow because of the convoluted plot structure, the traveling through
this time gate that allows him to emerge at various points in time. But it's still considered,
as I said, a classic by some people. And Heinlein has used what has been termed cyclic time travel
before, or at least he has used it since in other stories. This story, along with some of his other
earlier ones, are based on a gimmick of some kind. Another one along these same lines, using an idea
or a gimmick in it, is, and he built a cricket house. It's a very unusual and humorous short story
concerning a fellow who builds a house in the form of an unfolded tesseract, or hypercube,
a four-dimensional cube. This is a house that looks like four cubes stacked on top of each other with
a cross cube on the second level up from the top. And he builds this thing in California,
and there happens to be an earthquake one night, and the whole thing folds up. And now he has a
four-dimensional house. When they enter it to find out what happened to the rest of the house,
they aren't sure they think maybe someone came and took it away or something. They don't find any
debris around it, however. But they go inside and look around and go up to where they think the
roof is going to be, and it's another room. And they keep going up and up and up, and we get the
top room and go up on what was the roof. They're back in the bottom room again. As they open windows
and doors, they find all sorts of interconnections that are not proper in the three-dimensional
universe in which we live. Eventually they open windows. One of them looks straight down the
side of the Empire State Building, and as they're looking out, which is rather disconcerting,
and another one looks upon a seascape, but it's upside down. Eventually they leave the house
through one of the windows, thinking that they're on an alien planet, and actually they're just out
into the Joshua Tree National Monument somewhere in the middle of California. Yeah, all of these
early stories dealt with some kind of clever twist or gimmick, something of that nature, and they
were very popular with the readers of Astounding, John W. Campbell's magazine. But Campbell, the
editor of that publication, in 1941 noted that many of Heinlein's stories followed a consistent
future. In other words, they would have certain development, certain people even,
that could be found in more than one story. And he wrote a little article about that, calling
the reader's attention to the fact that this author seemed to be writing what has come to be
called a future history. And since then, Heinlein has added many stories, many novels, to his
future history. And I think that, along with people like Paul Anderson and Larry Niven,
other authors who have done the same kind of thing, that this is, I guess it's almost a
rarity in science fiction, where an author will build an almost an entire future and follow it
through a number of stories and novels. Lifeline and Rosemus roll two stories which we've already
talked about are two of the stories in Heinlein's future history series. One of the ones following
that was Blow Ups Happen, which accurately predicts some of the problems we're having now with nuclear
waste and possibility of meltdown and nuclear and detonation of nuclear power plants.
And all those stories dealt with things on this earth. They started his future history and they
dealt with earthly matters. But very soon he went out into exploration. And his first stories in that
area were the exploration of the moon. And one of his novels, The Man Who Sold the Moon, published in 1950,
developed the theme of the exploration of the moon by private industry. Now, Heinlein sometimes can
hit the future pretty carefully when he extrapolates, or pretty closely when he extrapolates. This time
he seemed to be a little off in thinking that the moon would be explored, developed, exploited
by industry or private business. But anyhow, the protagonist of that novel is a man named D.D.
Harriman. And he's obsessed with exploring the moon and going to it, in fact, also. But he happens
to be a man who uses all of his great resources to hire pilots, to build spaceships, to conduct the
research and discover the technology necessary to get to the moon. And he's also a salesman, as a
title indicates, the man who sold the moon. He conducts a great advertising campaign.
Heinlein is noted for his detailed pictures of the future. And as Harriman tries to sell the moon
to the public, you see all sorts of examples of why Heinlein's considered to be a finely detailed
writer. For example, he sells the idea of advertising on the moon to a soft drink company.
He convinces them that they can project a beam on the moon, which will reproduce the logo of their
particular soft drink as a means of advertisement, and thereby gain money for his project.
But Harriman is successful. He does get people to the moon. He does start to exploit it.
And he has totally succeeded with what he set out to do. But earlier, he also, earlier than this,
Heinlein had written a story called Requiem, which is actually a sequel to this story, but was written first.
In Requiem, Harriman is able to outwit his heirs and eventually gets to the moon,
although at the cost of his own life. The story is considered one of Heinlein's more powerful
short stories in that it has a sort of wish fulfillment that almost any science fiction reader can identify with.
Yeah, there's a sentimentality to that story, which is not always found in Heinlein.
Usually, he's noted as a great realist. But here he has this old man who is almost ready for death.
He knows he's going to die if he makes a trip to the moon. But yet he accepts it simply because
he's always wanted to do that. It's not totally sentimental because he got what he wanted. He
knew it was going to happen and there are no tears shed at the end of it. But still, it's a note of
almost melodrama that's not usual in Heinlein's work. But very soon, he started to expand his
future history into the solar system, the other planets, the asteroid belt, and so forth.
And I think probably the collection of short stories known as the Green Hills of Earth
would contain most of that material. The stories in that particular book deal with all sorts of
themes, all sorts of human aspects of human nature as mankind expands throughout the solar system.
For instance, Delilah in the Space Rigger is one of the first women's lived science fiction stories.
And it's something which could have been written today, simply a story of the first woman who
went out to work on a space station. She's at first not accepted by the men simply because
she's a woman in the space as a man's world. But because of her courage, because of her ability,
she comes to be accepted and simply becomes a space woman. The Green Hills of Earth,
the title story of that volume, involves a blind bard of the spaceways named Riesling.
He's gone through the solar system many times. He's blind because of radiation. But he's a singer,
a bard. He makes up poems and songs and entertains the crews and they give him free rides.
He loses his life as he saves the crew of one spaceship. And as he dies,
locked in a room which contains radiation, he composes his last song,
a beautiful ballad about the Green Hills of Earth. One other story, misfit, just to mention it
briefly, introduces a character which later he picks up in Methuselah's Children, a man named
Andrew Jackson Libby. He's almost a human calculator and has a few adventures and saves his
fellow crew members and spacemen because of his amazing mental abilities.
In 1941, he wrote a story known as Methuselah's Children, in which we meet the character Lazarus
Long for the first time. According to the story, in 1974, an organization was formed to see if they
could increase longevity in humans by genetic means. And this was done to a certain family of people.
These people were able to live about three times longer than normal, I believe. And they had to
maintain secrecy of this fact from the general public for fear that the public would not understand
what they had done, would think that there was some kind of a special drug or device that would
allow them to become long-lived themselves. So this family kept this a secret until it eventually
got out. When it did become known, and of course they were in danger of their lives from the normal
populace, they commandeered a spaceship and took off for deep space. They eventually came across
a planet where they were going to try to settle, but there was an alien race that they contacted
there that was so alien and so strange that they just simply couldn't handle it. They had to leave.
They went to one other place, I believe, and then finally came back to earth to try to reconcile
themselves with the human populace because they just couldn't hack being out in space as refugees
forever. When they came back, here's the twist that is common to many of Heinlein's stories.
The human race said that they left behind and found some sort of a way to become long-lived
themselves and so that the whole escapade became academic. There are a couple things about that
story that were interesting in addition to what you said, the spaceship, the interstellar craft
that they commandeered to escape earth. I believe that was the first time Heinlein had taken any of
his characters outside the solar system where they achieved interstellar flight, even though they did
come back home. It was a successful journey in the sense they stayed out there and colonized.
Also there's alien contact, of course, with the alien races. In Lazarus Long, I suppose, along with
Michael Valentine Smith and Stranger in a Strange Land, he would be the most recognizable of Heinlein's
main characters. There have been books published about Lazarus Long's sayings, his wisdom.
Of course, he lived such a tremendous span of years that he would gain all sorts of wisdom and
all kinds of little sayings and aphorisms were associated with him. But he was the head of
his family, the Howard family, I believe it was called, that originally were the ones that had
longevity. And he does turn up later in Heinlein's future history. Probably the end of the,
the end chronologically, not so much the end as being the last book he wrote about it,
but the end chronologically of his future history would occur in two short stories,
both published in 1941, one entitled Universe and one entitled Common Sense. Later published his
Orphans of the Sky, a novel. In Universe, we're shown a ship that is a slow boat or a generation
ship taking a crew of humans to a far distant star so that they can begin life again. And this is a
ship that moves so slow that the first people who boarded the ship would not live to, to see the
end of the voyage. Their descendants would be the ones who would eventually reach the planet that
they're aiming for. This has been in transit so long and things have happened over the years to
the ship that the people on board have forgotten that it's even a ship. They live in the interior
and for all that they know, that is the entire field of existence, the entire universe is that
interior where they live and have their farms and houses and cities. The exterior portions of the ship
are controlled by mutants who prevent the normal humans from reaching the exterior portions of
the ship and thereby seeing the stars and exterior universe. Yeah, there's a great deal of animosity
between the mutants and the regular humans. In fact, what they really have to do is combine forces
before they can ever realize that this is a ship going somewhere and try to do something about it.
The protagonist or the main character in that story is a strange creature. He's one of the
mutants. He has two heads and he happens to convince one of the normal humans what he's found out.
He has found out this two-headed mutant has found out that this is a ship they're on
and he convinces one of the normal humans. And the story is optimistic. Even though these people
have lost sight of who they are and where they're going, as the title indicates, they think their
little ship is the universe. The story ends with the words, the two-headed mutant says to his friend,
we've got to do it, you know, meaning tell the other humans they have to stop the ship,
they have to get, well first of all get where they're going and then stop the ship.
In the second part, common sense, this is what they do. They do convince the humans that they are
on a ship, but complications ensue. Politics gets, comes into it. Power factions, petty jealousies,
a lack of organization occur. And by the end of the story, common sense, only a few
of the people on that ship do escape to the planet the ship had been aimed at generations and
generations ago. But some people consider that the two stories together, entitled Orphans of the
Skies and Oh, some people consider that book the classic of the generation ship or slow ship stories.
Probably the turning point in Heinlein's stories was Starship Troopers written in 1959.
The story was supposedly the last in a series of juvenile novels, which Heinlein was writing at
the time, but it wasn't accepted by the publisher because of its, its content, specifically the
way it treated war. The story briefly is about a young man, Juan Rico, who grows up and becomes
part of the military service and then serving in the military service has various adventures on
other planets. Rico learns the nature of war and its ends value, the need for discipline and a,
and a philosophy of punishment, which some readers found very unusual. Anti-social behavior in the
book is strictly limited and the whole society is very regimented. One of the main points that
Heinlein wants to make in the novel is that if man had no challenge, he would tend to become complacent.
Also another theme that you find in the story is that it's a success story, which is
similar to many other of Heinlein's works. But also some readers, as you mentioned earlier,
but the publishers, I think, which gave him a little trouble with the book, have seen it as very
militaristic. Heinlein has been accused of many things, contradictory things. It's hard to pin him down.
He's been called a fascist on the one hand, a liberal on the other, an anarchist on one hand,
a militarist on the other. The novel viewed in a rather strict sense could be viewed as fascist,
but it really isn't. Heinlein was a social Darwinist in that he believed that the strong would prevail.
Another category of Heinlein's works that we might mention started with a novel,
Rocket Ship Galileo in 1947. Heinlein's become rather well known for his juvenile novels,
of which there are a number. Yeah, I think there were 13 juveniles and
among the many barriers that Heinlein broke as a science fiction writer, one of them was the
juvenile market. He was the first one to really pick up a public of juvenile readers. I believe
it was Lester Del Ray, the critic who said that one of the greatest factors in the spread of
science fiction or the importance of it today were the juvenile novels of Heinlein because the
whole generation was brought up reading those books and that generation is now the readers,
the writers, the editors, and so forth of science fiction. So they were sort of educated
on Heinlein's juveniles. In his juvenile novels he covered many and various themes, very good
action adventure novel, one of them being Starman Jones about a young Ozark farm boy who eventually
becomes the captain of a starliner. A half-space suit will travel about a young man who wins a
spacesuit in a contest and goes out and tries it on and is immediately picked up by aliens from
another world and carried off to various adventures. Rocketship Galileo, which we already mentioned,
which was made into a movie Destination Moon and Space Cadet, which inspired the TV series
Tom Corbett Space Cadet. I think overall we might say that all of these juveniles,
the main theme, one which would obviously appeal to the class of readers they reamed at,
is sort of boy into man. You have an adolescent who undergoes various adventures, it matures him,
it expands him, and he becomes a young man by the end of the book and that appealed of course to that
class of reader. As you said before, the book Rocketship Galileo was the inspiration for the
1950 working with Heinlein by the way, and it's recognized by movie critics and science fiction
critics both as the initiator or the impetus for one of the greatest eras of science fiction films,
the 1950s. Destination Moon really started that, it got the public interested in science fiction
movies, it showed them they could be made intelligently. In the same year Kellogg's picked up
Heinlein's novel Space Cadet and made it into Tom Corbett Space Cadet, a 15 minute program,
which was seen nationwide and became extremely popular and went on for several years and it was
a great innovator in special effects in the field of television.
And of course Heinlein's recent books are very different than the ones he started off writing
back in his future history days. Some readers don't like his recent books, they are different,
they're avant-garde, they're liberal, they're controversial, they treat things like religion,
sex, and all kinds of social institutions from a very strange viewpoint and probably Heinlein's
best known book belongs to this category and that of course would be Stranger in a Strange Land
published in 1961. Stranger in a Strange Land uses several themes which Heinlein has used throughout
his works, one of them being a father figure or an educator which
becomes aligned with a young man or young person and helps them over their problems with learning
about new situations and new environments or what's happening to them as they grow up.
Yeah, the protagonist of that book Michael Valentine Smith, he's called a Martian but he's
really a human that's grown up on Mars, he's never known the earth, his parents have gone to Mars,
the ship had not come back, they died, he'd been born right before they died on the planet Mars
and he comes back to earth I think in his mid-twenties and he's been raised by the Martians, the old
ones I believe they're called and he's got some extremely strange powers which illustrate Heinlein's
occasional interest in a sort of a superman type, a superhuman type, a special leader with powers
and insights and wisdom that the common people don't have and the novel is based upon the
strange powers of this Michael Valentine Smith. The story starts off as an action adventure story
where Michael Valentine Smith is rescued from the hospital in which he's recuperating from the
flight back to earth, he's taken to his soon-to-be father figure Jubal Hershaw and Jubal sets about
and educating Michael in the ways and customs of earth. What Heinlein does in that book is
Michael Smith or Michael Valentine Smith becomes educated in earth ways, it gives Heinlein the
opportunity to view earth, its institutions, its customs and so forth with the point of view of an
outsider, you know even though Michael is a human being, he's a Martian, he's been raised by Martians
so his responses to what he sees on earth, the social institutions, the religions and so forth
form I think the center of the book and Michael soon gathers a group of people around him
and they become his followers and I guess you'd start what he, I guess he starts what you'd call
a religion based on on certain things that he has learned in his upbringing on Mars. He eventually
teaches several of his followers how to also use these particular powers that he has and in order to
use these abilities one has to grok or to know and completely holistically understand
certain concepts about the universe and how it operates. This particular word grok was
quite popular in the 60s, it became kind of a catch word for the people who had read the novel.
Yeah that especially the character of Smith and the word grok and so forth
sort of became the property of the so-called flower children, the hippies of the 60s.
They really picked up on the book the idea of an outsider of someone who has new things to offer
to society who wants change. The ideas that Highland put across with free love and sex and the
novel also had a great deal to do with some of the changing mores in the 60s. Some people have seen a
heavily symbolic value to Smith. He is killed by earth people who are afraid of his movement
but he has the ability as taught to him by the old ones on Mars to overcome death,
sort of a resurrection, not his physical body as such but a new state of being.
And I think that some people see that as almost a Christ symbol. You have a leader with special powers,
he gains followers, he dies but he's still there to inspire and inform them and teach them.
He's been called the dean of science fiction. His works span the history of science fiction from
pulp days to the present. He is still an important influence in the field and it's certain that
science fiction would not be the same without Robert A. Heinlein.
This is David Cruz. Darrell A. and David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.